In this video we're going to talk about how to get set up for Android development on Windows.
I'm going to show you all the tools that you need to download to get set up for making Android apps
on a Windows machine.
Now for part of this demo I'll be sharing a screen on a machine that's running Windows 8.
If you're running Windows 10 it might be slightly different but it shouldn't be too far off.
The first thing we're going to do is check if we're running a 64 bit or 32 bit machine.
So go to your control panel you can find it under settings control panel and then click on system and
there you'll be able to find your system type.
Mine says 64 bit operating system.
So make a note if you've got a 64 bit or 32 bit machine.
Most modern computers will probably be 64 bit.
Now it's time to check if you've got the Java development kit.
The Java development kit is what you'll need to make Android apps or any java program for that matter.
The JDK includes things like the Java runtime environment and the Java compiler.
Here's how you can check if you've already got Java installed and can move onto the next.
If you're already set up with Java you should be able to see a little icon on your Control Panel that
reads Java.
However you'll also need to make sure you've got a relatively recent version so click on the icon and
then click about and here you'll see a build number.
This should read 1.8 or higher so don't have the very latest one installed.
Mine reads version 8 update 77 which is fine if you need to get hold of the JDK.
The easiest way is to type Java development kit into Google and head to the Oracle Web site on the Oracle
Web site you'll see the latest Java development kit available for download to download the JDK you first
have to accept the license agreement.
So click accept and scroll down the list of options.
Now for Windows users is going to be two options that are going to be relevant.
They'll be the 64 bit version the x 64.
And then there will be the 32 bit version which confusingly is labelled X 86.
Now if you've got a 64 bit machine like myself and almost every computer that you would have bought
in the past three years is 64 bit.
You're going to download that x 64.
X-File otherwise you're going to pick that file above to match it with your chipset.
Once you've downloaded the file executed and just follow along with the wizard after the JDK has finished
installing.
Pick your destination folder and in-door Oracle bragging how many devices run Java after a successful
install.
You'll definitely see that Java icon appear in your control panel and when you click on it again you'll
be able to double check the version that you've just installed.
As long as that version number reads 8 and above you're fine.
Now it's time to install Android studio search for download Android studio in your browser and then
we're going to head to developer Android dot com.
From there we're going to download the latest version of Android studio again will be presented with
a wizard where we have to agree to the terms and conditions.
I wonder who actually reads these.
I'm pretty sure that by now I've promised somebody my first born child that Andrew is actually a pretty
large file and it seems to be getting larger with every update after the download has finished.
Follow the set of ways to install it.
You'll probably be presented with some sort of dialog box just like this.
Just click.
I do not have a previous version of Android studio and click OK now after you've done all that.
Here comes the best part.
Fire up the Android studio.
It's time to start that program now as you can already tell by the download file size.
Anders studio is pretty enormous and it's pretty greedy program too if it takes ages to run Android
studio and your computer is slow and frustrating to use.
Then check out my other video where I've put together some performance tips to spice things up a little.
Now the first thing you actually want to do after installing Android studio is check for updates.
Click on the gear icon where it says configure and select check for updates.
Chances are there are some updates available that you should install.
OK so now we've got the JDK sorted and Android studio sorted.
Now it's time to configure our physical device so that we can install our apps on it.
Take your physical Android phone and go to the settings and then in the settings.
Scroll all the way down where it says about or about phone and there you'll have to look for something
called a build number.
So on this HGC that I've got it's under software information.
And then more and Herods varied as a line item.
Now start tapping on that build number after you've tapped on it in a couple of times you're gonna see
these messages start appearing you are x steps away from being a developer.
So after you've tapped that seven times you become part of the secret developer club and a secret menu
up his.
So if you go back to your settings now you'll see a menu that was previously hidden namely the developer
options menu.
So go into the developer options for your phone and search for an item that reads USP debugging.
Make sure you enable us be debugging because taking that option is crucial for making sure the phone
is being recognized by the computer when you plug it in.
Now one of the difficulties with Android is that there isn't really one standard and your menu might
actually look slightly differently on your own phone.
So let me show you a nexus device for comparison.
So this nexus device had the build number buried in there about phone section.
So the message is you're going to have to hunt around a little bit for the stuff depending on what kind
of phone you've got and what kind of version of Android you're running after you've been able to use
that bugging on your phone or tablet.
It's time to grab some Goosby cables.
We're going to connect our device to our computer.
Now one thing I'll say about Gisby cables is make sure you get some good ones.
Either use the ones that came with the device or use some good quality ones that you've got off Amazon.
The way we're going to check that everything's working is we're going to open up Android studio started
a new project and plug in our phone to make sure it's being recognized and that way we can check that
everything is working and we're all set up and good to go.
So start a new project an android studio and go through that wizard that doesn't really matter what
you put in these fields for now because we're just going to start a blank project after you've gone
through the wizard and the studio will start building the project which may take a little while depending
on the speed of your machine.
But after it's done it should drop you off in a screen like this on the tab at the bottom left.
Click on Android monitor.
This will bring up a small window at the bottom of the screen.
At this point you'll probably see a gray message reading initialising 80 or Android de-bug bridge.
This is the name of the tool that enables communication between your computer and your physical Android
device.
Now plug in your Android device into your computer.
Keep an eye on the phone screen because you might see a prompt where you have to trust the computer
that you just plug it into.
If all went well you should see log messages starting to scroll and the Android monitor.
Now if you don't see your device appear in the Android monitor and those log messages scrolling there's
a problem most likely is that you haven't enabled you'll be debugging.
Take another look at the Android device that you've plugged in in the status bar at the top.
You should see some symbols that look similar to these.
These symbols indicate that you're speed of bugging is enabled and you should also be able to see this
in your notification drawer.
Another common problem is a bad or damaged cable.
So for this demo if I actually use the pretty crappy cable to show you what can happen.
So even though I've got my HTC plugged in it's currently showing us disconnected.
And that's because the cable is pretty shoddy and it loses the connection if it's not just the right
angle.
Also some cables out there are just charge the device they don't actually transfer any data.
So it's really worth investing in a decent cable if you're going to be doing any Android development.
It's also worth checking how your Android device is connected to your laptop.
So if you pull down that notification drawer you should see something like connected as empty the media
transfer protocol but this might not necessarily be your default option.
If you see something else listed here like transfer files or supply power or use as midi device then
click on that option and change it to empty.
Because otherwise Android studio won't necessarily pick it up.
Now one other thing that we've seen trip people up other than the speed of plugging in the cable is
device drivers.
Right now Windows machine needs a driver for every piece of hardware a printer phone that you plug in
your graphics card.
Everything's got to drive right.
And if all goes well Windows should be able to automatically download and install the necessary drivers
when you plug in a new device.
However Windows doesn't always get it right.
So you might have to actually download and install the driver manually.
Now hopefully it won't come to this but if it does the Android studio developer Web site is actually
good for helping people out on the same page where you've downloaded Android studio.
You can go to a user guide and then under build and run your app you'll see install OEM USP drivers.
This is under a submenu called run apps on a hardware device and there you'll see that the folks at
Google have collated a list of manufacturer's web sites.
So depending on which phone you've got you can select the relevant one and download the driver.
So I hope this video was helpful in getting everything set up and working in the next lesson.
We're going to configure and tweak Android Sudie a tiny bit so that it's a bit more helpful with our
workflow.
I'll see you there.